Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger.
We are looking at the difficulties
with establishing real numbers as infinite
decimals. These are very serious difficulties,
which the professor these days is doing
their best to avoid acknowledging,
and there's a good reason for it because
the price to be paid, as we'll see,
is quite significant, or at least it appears
to be. However, we'll see that there are great
opportunities as well by acknowledging
the difficulties and moving beyond them.
Last time, we talked about infinite decimals in
terms of infinite choice sequences—the idea that
it was possible to prescribe decimals one
at a time, arbitrarily and independently,
forever and ever. We basically explained very
clearly, I hope, the difficulties with that
position. Today, we're going to look at another
approach to infinite decimals: the algorithmic,
constructive, or computational approach. In this
approach, we think of an infinite decimal as being
expressed by an algorithm, so the sequence
of digits that we're trying to get at can be
captured by an algorithm, a procedure, a function,
a computer program, or some equivalent method.
So we really have these three positions: the
infinite choice position, the algorithmic,
constructive, or computational position,
and then a third position, which is really
the only one left to us once we acknowledge
the difficulty or impossibility of the first
two positions. That third position
is a finitist or rational position,
which is that infinite decimals are
illogical and unnecessary. Ultimately,
this is the position that we are going to adopt,
and I am going to try to show you that mathematics
is not impoverished by this position but actually
unfolds before us in a brand new and exciting way.
Alright, today we're going to look at the
algorithmic, constructive, or computational
approach to what is an infinite decimal, and we're
going to look at the pros and cons. Let me start
by saying that I have a lot of sympathy for this
approach to infinite decimals. I think this is a
very reasonable thing to try to do—to try to look
at an infinite decimal like 3.1415926, and so on,
with digits that go on and on forever, by
approaching that from the point of view that says,
"Well, we need an algorithm that describes the
digits, and we'll think of the infinite decimal as
really being encoded by the algorithm." The beauty
of that is that the algorithm is a finite object,
and so we can work with the infinite decimal
as represented by this finite object. I
think that's a very sensible, reasonable, and
natural thing to try to do. The only problem
with it is that it's too difficult to do, and
ultimately, we can't do it in the year 2012.
Alright, so what do we mean, first
of all, by an algorithm? Clearly,
we need to think about what that word means.
So intuitively, we might say that it's a finite
list of well-defined instructions that give us a
step-by-step procedure for a calculation. Often,
the calculation that we want to do is of a
function. This is an English-language definition,
something that you might find in a dictionary.
I don't think at all that it's clear enough and
precise enough for mathematical usage, but
at least it gives us an initial orientation
to what an algorithm is. Those of you
who are familiar with computers can,
if you like, think of it as being
essentially a computer program.
So what we have here, for example, is a piece
of paper or a file on your hard drive with
instructions: instruction number one, instruction
number two, perhaps down to instruction number
15. These instructions allow us, for example, to
calculate a function to capture this number pi.
The function naturally might input the place
of the decimal and output the decimal value,
so F of 1 equals 1, F of 2 equals 4, F of
3 equals 1, and F of 0 equals 3, let's say,
F of 7 equals 6, and so on. So the idea
is, you want to know what is the 1, 2,
3, 4, 5—the 5th decimal place. So you input the
number 5, perform the operations on the number 5,
eventually you get an output, and hopefully,
that output is the digit 9. And that's how we
can specify the entire infinite decimal by a
very finite, cut-and-dried procedure. It's a
very attractive idea, an attractive
idea which ultimately doesn't work.
As we go down this route, it's clear that there
are some significant challenges ahead of us. First
of all, we are going to need an underlying
theory or understanding of algorithms. We're
going to have to know a lot about algorithms: what
they are, how they work, how they're implemented.
We need a theory of algorithms. Secondly, we're
going to have to acknowledge that conceptually,
this framework for establishing a number
system is much, much more complicated than
for rational numbers. Rational numbers—1/6 plus
2/7 equals 19 over 42—what a rational number is,
is pretty simple. It's a pair of integers;
how we add them is reasonably simple;
how we multiply them is reasonably simple. Here,
what we're going to be dealing with is algorithms,
computer programs, and we're going to have to
deal with the challenge of how you add them,
how you multiply them, how you check the
laws of arithmetic. It's a big challenge.
We'll probably need help from computer science
because we're talking about algorithms. The
computer scientists know all about algorithms.
They're the ones who work with these things;
they have very elaborate experience and
theories for them. However, within mathematics,
there's also the theory of computation.
Mathematicians also study computation. So
there's something called the lambda calculus,
there are things called Turing machines,
there's something called automata theory, and
other things as well. And the question is, will
we need any of these theories in order to set up
our approach to infinite decimals as algorithms?
Alright, so what are the pros and cons of
trying to look at infinite decimals in terms of
algorithms? Well, there are lots of advantages;
there are lots of good reasons for trying to
do this. The first one, perhaps, is that this
general orientation agrees with the historical
point of view. Historically, the infinite decimals
that people dealt with were given by procedures,
by algorithms, by rules that generated digits one
at a time. For example, the square root algorithm,
which we've talked about several points in this
series, going back to the Babylonians. The Hindus
had such an algorithm, the Greeks, the Arabs,
and then Newton for square root of 2, square root
of 5, and so on. These are procedures that work
step by step, and they allow us to get closer and
closer to rational approximations, which can be
converted into further and further initial strings
of a decimal. There's also a cube root algorithm,
which we haven't talked about, but it's a more
sophisticated version of a square root algorithm.
In fact, it was studied by ancient Indian
mathematician Aryabhata around 500 AD, and of
course, it's also accessible by Newton's method.
And then we must mention pi, which plays
a very big role in the history of people's
fascination with infinite decimals. So pi has
been tackled going back to Archimedes, who
initiated an essentially algorithmic process for
approximating pi. But the first, perhaps modern,
formula goes back to an Indian mathematician
Madhava from Kerala in southern India in the
1300s, who came up with this remarkable formula
that pi is equal to the square root of 12 times
[1 minus 1 over 3 times 3 plus 1 over 5 times 3
squared minus 1 over 7 times 3 cubed, and so on].
So each one of these terms is getting smaller
because the denominators are getting bigger,
keep multiplying by the next odd number and
then by powers of 3. So we're adding and
subtracting smaller and smaller quantities,
and if you go to a certain number of terms,
then you can compute a relatively accurate
approximation to pi provided you also know
how to take a square root of 2. And Madhava, in
fact, was able to calculate pi to this number of
decimal places using 21 terms of this series. Now,
this is an algorithmic approach. You have a very
cut-and-dried formula. You can go as far as you
want in this formula. You can compute something;
you get an initial part of the decimal. So
in principle, you can keep going, keep going,
getting more and more digits this way. So
the decimal is encoded by this formula,
which we could think of these days as also
a procedure or computer program if we like.
And historically, there have been many, many
other formulas for pi. In my next video,
in fact, we are going to have a good look at pi
and some of the many formulas that people have
come up with that essentially give us algorithms
for computing pi. Alright, so historically,
this point of view corresponds to
what people used to think. Stevin,
when he introduced real numbers in the 17th
century, would have been thinking about these
infinite decimals in this algorithmic fashion
because the main examples that he would have had,
like roots and pi, were of that form.
Also, I suppose repeating decimals,
which are also a special and very simple
example of an algorithm that generates digits.
Another advantage to this algorithmic
approach, if we can make it work,
is that it allows evaluation of so-called
infinite series. These are very important
constructions in analysis, and the real
numbers, as we currently have them,
allow us—or seem to allow us—to evaluate
these things. For example, consider this
infinite series. So it's an infinite series in
the sense that we're adding more and more terms,
but the terms that we're adding are getting
smaller and smaller, so we're converging
to something, we think, and that something
that we're converging to is a real number.
Now, this series here, the terms are
actually forming a very nice and important
pattern. Here we have 1 over 2, and then 1
over 2 times 3, and then 2 times 3 times 4,
2 times 3 times 4 times 5, and the denominators—so
these numbers are called factorials. So we can
write this summation more compactly using
this summation sign introduced by Euler.
So we're summing from N equals 0 to infinity
1 over N factorial. 1 over 0 factorial is 1
by definition because 0 factorial is
defined to be 1. Then there's 1 over
1 factorial, 1 over 2 factorial, 1 over 3
factorial, 1 over 4 factorial, and so on.
So how do we approach such an infinite series?
Through the idea of partial sums, where we go
from N equals 0 to some fixed natural number K.
So in other words, we add up all the terms up to
a certain amount and compute what we've got. So
in this case, the first partial sum is just that
first term, which is 1. The second partial sum,
the first two terms, that's 2. Then the next one
will be 5/2. As a decimal, 2.5. And then when
we add this term here, we get 8/3, which is
2.6 repeated. Then we add this one on top of it,
and we get 65/24, which turns out to be 2.7083
repeated. Then s5 is 163/60—that's 2.716 repeated.
s6 is this, s7 is this, and s8 is this, starting
to get a little bit more complicated here. The
repetition only kicks in at this level here.
Now, if we look at all these partial sums, we see
that they are sort of converging to something in
the sense that the first terms start to stabilize
after a while. So here we get 2.718, and here's
another 2.718, 2.718. All the further terms are
going to have 2.718 in them. So as we keep going
and keep going, we end up generating more and
more digits. So this is really an algorithm;
it's really a step-by-step procedure that can be
used to create an infinite decimal step by step,
slowly, slowly, more and more. Here is
the limiting value. The limiting value is
a very important number called e—that's the
base of natural logarithms. It plays a very
important role in mathematics. It's 2.71828,
1828459045235360287, and so on and so on. Now
it's represented by exactly this infinite
series, and we can think of this infinite
series in terms of an algorithm. It's laying
out a procedure for calculating more and more
of these infinite decimals. So the advantage is
we don't need to think about the object itself as
being this infinite decimal going on forever
and ever and ever and ever. We don't have to
become philosophical about what does "forever and
ever and ever" mean because we can just work with
this formula. This formula is essentially encoding
this decimal. The formula is a very finite thing;
it presents us with a very simple algorithm
that generates the decimal. So it's the same
kind of idea as when we use something like
this with a repeating decimal. We had some
finite expression that actually encodes something
that we can think of as going on forever, but the
actual expression that we're using is finite. The
expression is finite; it's a finite algorithm.
So this is one big advantage: that the infinite
series can be summed this way. Of course,
there's a little bit of a catch. The series has
to have the property that the terms that we're
adding get small sufficiently fast so that there's
some kind of convergence so that we do actually
end up stabilizing and that these things don't
start wandering around as we add more terms. So
not all infinite series are summable in this way,
but the convergent ones are, and we do need this
theory of real numbers, it seems, to sum them. And
this is one big advantage in thinking about real
numbers this way—in this algorithmic way—that
it allows us to sum convergent infinite series.
Another big advantage of the algorithmic approach
is that it allows us to define many functions. For
example, the exponential function, a key function
in modern analysis, which we can define this
way along with Euler: the limit as n approaches
infinity of (1 + x/n) to the nth power. So we're
inputting x, and we're outputting this thing.
Well, this thing is really an algorithm, or it's
a procedure that allows us to calculate more and
more digits of some decimal number. For example,
suppose we want to calculate e squared, or the
x of 2. So the x has the value 2; we're going
to replace this with 2. So what we have to do is
we have to calculate this expression for a given
value of n, n equals 1, and then n equals 2, and
then n equals 3, and so on, and keep going, and
hopefully, the digits that we get will stabilize
and give us ultimately a decimal expression.
So what happens in this case? Well, in the
case n equals 1, we have 1 plus 2 over 1 to
the 1st power, which equals 3. When n is 2, we get
1 plus 2 over 2 squared, which is 4. When n is 3,
1 plus 2 over 3 cubed, which is this 4.629
repeated. When n is 4, we get 5.0625—it's a finite
decimal or a decimal number. When n is 5, we
get 5.3782 for another decimal number. And here,
1 plus 2 over 6 to the 6th power—well, it's
some repeating decimal because it's a fraction,
but actually, the repeating part
is too long to easily contain here.
So what's happening to these numbers? Are
they progressing towards some goal? Are
they stabilizing? Well, in fact, they are not
stabilizing very clearly at this level here,
and that's because we haven't chosen enough
n's. We haven't gone far enough to even start
seeing a pattern. It turns out that the
limit of these things is this real number,
7.389056098, and so on. And to get
the first three digits here, the 7.38,
so in order to get 7.38 consistently, you
need to go to n being around 1600. You
need to go a long way in this series before
you even start getting the first few terms.
Alright, well, this can happen. There's no
indication about how long we have to go before
we get to what we want, but nevertheless, this
thing does converge. And as we go further and
further with increasing values of n, then we
end up generating more and more and more of
these digits, and this is e squared, which is
exactly the square of that number e that we
had on our previous slide. So this approach to
real numbers as algorithms allows us to define
many important functions of modern analysis,
so it's a very key application of the idea.
A fourth major advantage in this algorithmic
approach is that it allows us to define and
evaluate integrals. Integrals are a key tool
for modern analysis and modern mathematics
more generally. So, for example, and I'm just
giving an overview here, this is not a careful
exposition of either integrals or analytic
functions or infinite series. I'm just giving
you a taste of some of these ideas. So here's
the function f of x equals e to the negative
x squared. So it's that exponential function
we were considering before with now a minus x
squared input into it. If we graph it, we get
something that looks like this. It's a famous
bell curve shape. And let's say that we're
interested in the integral from 0 to 1 of this
function. And that means we're trying to estimate
or find the area under this graph from 0 to 1.
Okay, so there are various ways of trying to
define what this integral is. And one way, which
was introduced by the famous German mathematician
Riemann in the middle of the 19th century,
is in terms of a limit of approximating sums of
rectangles. So what we can think of here is, say,
we can divide the interval from 0 to 1 into n
equal little pieces. And for each one of these
little pieces, we're going to build a rectangle
whose height is the function's value at, say,
the rightmost endpoint of the interval. So in
this case, we get all these little rectangles,
which are just lying underneath the curve, and we
can calculate the sum of all these little areas,
and that's what this is. So here is
the common width of the rectangle,
and here are the various heights of the
rectangles, summed from 1 to n, the values
of the function. These are the values at these
various points of this particular function.
Alright, this kind of expression cannot be
calculated within the framework of rational
numbers, except in an approximate way. But
the real numbers ostensibly give us a way
to actually complete the calculation—to get
something that's not approximate but actually
something that's exactly correct. Okay, so what
ends up happening is that we have to calculate
this sum for various values of n. So, for
example, when n is 2, then we have 1/2 of
e to the negative 1/4 plus e to the negative
1, which turns out to be this. When n is 5,
meaning we have 5 little rectangles sitting
under the curve from 0 to 1, then the sum
of the rectangles is 1/5 e to the negative
1/20 plus e to the negative 4/25 to e to the
negative 1. These are the various heights of the
rectangles. Work that out, and we get something
like this. When n equals 10, 1/10, the same kind
of sum with 10 terms, we get something like this.
We need to make some remarks about the
calculations here. So the calculation
here is involving already these terms here, which
themselves are given by algorithms. So we have an
algorithm for e to the x, so we have an algorithm
for e to the negative 1/4, and that's the kind of
thing that we're using. We have two of those; we
have to be able to sum them up and divide by two
to get this term here. So this is not a case
of having rational numbers that we're using;
we're already using real numbers at each
stage here. And then the idea is to look
at these numbers, and as n gets big, to see
if they start trending towards some values,
and it turns out that they do. You want to go
further than n equals 10, so as we keep going,
we slowly start converging to
a decimal that looks like this.
Okay, so this is just a very quick introduction
to integration, which we haven't talked at all
about in this course up till now. We
will eventually talk about integrals,
but just to give you a sense of the claim
that real numbers as algorithms do allow us
to calculate integrals under functions, and this
is a primary advantage and good reason for having
real numbers as algorithms around. So this is
something that a mathematician values highly.
We like to be able to integrate; we like to
be able to get answers to things like this,
and real numbers are seemingly providing that
framework for doing that. Real numbers ultimately,
in terms of an algorithm, because contained
in the idea of an integral is really the
algorithm described by Riemann,
but actually going back to Newton.
So there are quite a few more advantages
to real numbers in terms of algorithms,
but they sort of follow the same kind of line,
and they're often consequences of the ones
I've already mentioned. In addition, we have the
advantages that I laid out for infinite decimals
in terms of infinite choice in my previous
video. We have things like the existence of
the intermediate value theorem, which is
also really an algorithmic procedure. We
have the existence of the fundamental theorem
of algebra, the factorization of polynomials,
which is also an algorithmic procedure. So there's
a whole host of mathematical theorems that rely on
real numbers, properties of real numbers, which
are intimately connected with the algorithmic
aspect in this respect that we're talking
about now. So we have a lot of good reasons
for wanting to have real numbers and wanting
to have real numbers in terms of algorithms.
However, the painful reality is that there are
serious problems, so let's have a look at some
of the difficulties. Alright, the first is that
this theory is very, very difficult to set up. So
what are some of the difficulties? Well, first
of all, we have to decide what exactly is an
algorithm? What are we going to be talking about?
What is an algorithm? What is a computer program?
What is a procedure? What kind of functions
are we going to be considering when we talk
about algorithms or computer programs? We're
often thinking about having a certain machine,
we're working in C++ or in Pascal or in
Fortran or something. So what machine,
what language, what formulas are you going
to allow? There are some subtle issues but
important issues about whether you're going
to allow bounded or unbounded running times.
So if you have an algorithm, say,
that generates the nth digit of pi,
and I'm interested in calculating the billionth
digit of pi using your algorithm, a natural
question is how long is this going to take me?
Okay, so the issue here is, do I know ahead of
time roughly how long this is going to take me
to calculate this billionth digit? For example,
you might tell me this is going to take
me, you know, 24 hours, or maybe 24 days,
or maybe 24 years, but if it's going to take me
24 centuries, then I probably want to know that
before I start with the algorithm. And if
you don't know how long it's going to take,
it might be that your algorithm is such that
it's unclear how long it's going to take. It
might take 24 billion years—well, then that's
a serious obstacle. So the question is,
are we going to specify that algorithms
are bounded or unbounded in running time?
A related issue is, do we require certificates
of boundedness? So if you come to me with an
algorithm, and you claim it's a bounded algorithm,
I might want to know, well, are you going to give
me a proof of that fact, or am I just going
to take your word for it? So is the proof of
the boundedness of an algorithm part of the data
that we're going to demand from our algorithms?
So let's suppose that we've overcome these
difficulties. Let's suppose that we've
established what framework we're working in.
We know exactly what an algorithm is in this
context. We've decided what kind of machines
we're working on, and so on, and we've answered
these questions. Then there are these very,
very significant challenges that loom ahead.
We're going to have to define, of course,
the operations—the operations of addition
and multiplication, and then ultimately of
subtraction and division too—but let's focus
on these. So if you have one algorithm for a real
number, and I have another algorithm for a real
number—so algorithm 1 and algorithm 2—how are we
going to combine those two algorithms to give a
third algorithm for the sum of our numbers? If my
algorithm generates a decimal number, and yours
does too, if we add those decimals, we're going
to get another decimal number, and that's going
to be also given by an algorithm. The question is,
how do you get algorithm 3 from algorithm 1 and
algorithm 2? How do you define this operation at
the level of algorithms? And you're going to have
to worry that this is well-defined because
there are lots of real numbers that have a
whole bunch of different algorithms that
define them, so you're going to have to
have a check to make sure that your definition
of addition of algorithms, whatever it may be,
is actually well-defined. And you're going
to, of course, have to do the same thing with
multiplication, which is going to be even harder.
And then, once you've done that, you're going to
have to prove that the laws of arithmetic
work. You're going to have to prove that
the distributive law works for your definitions
of addition and multiplication of algorithms.
Now, let me point out to you a very serious
challenge that you're going to have to deal
with. So this is the same problem that we saw
with the infinite choice approach to infinite
decimals. The problem is, what happens when,
at the decimal digit level, you end up with
some nines? So let's say we're adding these two
numbers, and here are the actual decimal numbers.
We don't know what the algorithms are, just at
the decimal number level. So one, eight, eight,
and here is one plus four is five, but the next
sum is nine. So we have to check what's happening
before we can write down a five because there
might be a six here if that nine spills over
and gives us a carry. And here we have zero plus
nine, that's nine; two plus seven, another nine;
another nine, another nine, another nine,
another nine, another nine. So the question is,
what is your algorithm going to do at this exact
point right here? Your algorithm for adding these
decimals has got to come up with that digit. So
your algorithm can detect that there's a nine
summed next, and then another nine appearing,
another nine here. And, for example, it can try
to check the next thousand or million places,
and if you don't get some nines at some point,
well then you're alright, but if you get a
total of nine for the next million places,
at some point your algorithm is going to
have to say, "Alright, wait a minute. We're
going to have to stop checking and see whether
we can otherwise determine what this thing is."
So you have a big advantage working with
algorithms rather than with infinite choice
because you know what the algorithm
is that generates this digit sequence,
and you know what algorithm it is that generates
this digit sequence, so in principle, it might be
possible for you to analyze those algorithms and
see whether this pattern of matching up numbers,
adding up to nine, continues indefinitely or
not. That's the question: Does the sequence of
nines we're getting continue indefinitely, or
does it eventually stop and give us something
else? Because you have the algorithms, you
are at least theoretically in a position
to check that by analyzing the structure of the
algorithms. But that's going to be a horrendously
difficult thing to do, okay? And probably, to
be honest, it's probably not even possible,
but let's give you the benefit of the
doubt, alright? It's going to be very,
very, horrendously difficult, and you have
to be able to deal with this. So you have
to build into your algorithms for addition
and multiplication this exact issue here
of how to deal with nines that appear, that
seem to go on forever, but you're not sure.
Alright, in the year 2012, I'm confident in saying
that no such theory exists. We're not even close
to having a theory of real numbers as infinite
decimals generated by algorithms in this fashion.
It just does not exist. No one has come up with
such a thing. It's just the reality of it. Now,
I think this is a great project. It's a
great project in the sense that even if
we were able to make some small progress, it
would be very interesting. So, for example,
you might be able to generate a theory like this
that works not with general algorithms but rather
algorithms of a rather specialized kind—something
like repeating decimals, but maybe just a little
bit more complicated than repeating decimals.
Again, I don't know of any theory that goes
beyond repeating decimals, except when you're
kind of looking at finite field extensions,
which you can encode algorithmically if you want
to, but something that's sort of significantly
beyond finite field extensions—I don't know of
such a theory. But it would be very interesting
if someone were able to come up with such
a thing. So I don't say it's impossible;
maybe some clever people in the future will
be able to derive and create such a theory,
but currently, we do not have such a thing. So
my criticism of this theory is, in some sense,
I'm criticizing something that doesn't really
exist. This is a dream; it's a dream currently.
So even though it'd be great to have such
a theory, we do not have such a theory.
A second key problem is the non-uniqueness
of algorithms. The exponential function,
for example, that we talked about earlier, I gave
you Euler's definition of it. Here is a quite
different definition of that exponential
function as an infinite series. In fact,
you can sort of see when x is equal to 1, we're
getting that value for e that we talked about
earlier. Alright, so you could encode this
infinite series in terms of an algorithm.
Then we have two different algorithms that
look, on the face of it, very different,
which in fact are generating the same function.
Unfortunately, there is no computable way of
checking if two algorithms generate the same
infinite decimal. There's no way of taking two
random algorithms and methodically checking
some condition to say, "Ah, these algorithms
generate the same infinite decimal." There's no
way of doing that. It's a very serious problem.
So to give you an illustration of that, here is
a specific example that rests on the classical
number theoretical problem of whether there are
any odd perfect numbers. So a perfect number
is a number like 6, whose sum of its divisors,
less than itself, equals the number itself. So
6 is the sum of its divisors, less than it is
1 plus 2 plus 3. Those are the divisors of 6,
and they sum up to 6, so 6 is perfect. 28
is also perfect because its divisors are 1,
2, 4, 7, and 14, and they also sum up to
twenty-eight. The question is, are there any
odd perfect numbers? No one knows the answer
to that famous number theoretical problem.
So, unfortunately or fortunately, we could
build in such a number theoretical conundrum
into an algorithm. So here's a little algorithm
to compute the nth digit of this decimal. Let's
call it x. Here's what you do: First of all,
you find the nth number. Let's call it k. So,
for example, if n happens to be 8, the 8th odd
number is 15, okay? Next, you calculate the sum
s of all the divisors d, which are less than k,
okay? So, for example, for 15, the divisors are 1,
3, and 5. We calculate the sum, that's 9, okay?
And we're calling that s, okay? If s equals k,
then we set the 8th digit to be equal to 1, and
if s is not equal to k, then we set the nth digit
to be 0. So here, is s equal to k? Is 9 equal to
15? No, it's not, which is telling us that 15 is
not an odd perfect number. So the instruction
is to set the 8th digit to be equal to zero,
alright? So this is a little algorithm which is
exactly going to output 0 here unless the nth odd
number is perfect, in which case we'll get a 1. So
we know that the first, you know, billion trillion
numbers, whatever, there are no odd numbers that
are perfect in there, so we can be sure that this
number that we're generating with this algorithm
starts 0.00000000 and goes on with zeros for at
least a few billion, but we don't know whether
this number is actually 0 or not. It's given by an
algorithm. The algorithm is completely precise; we
can code our computer, we can turn it on, but we
don't know whether that number is zero or not. It
might be that somewhere way down there, trillions
and trillions and trillions and trillions further
along, a one appears, okay? So we have no way at
the level of algorithms to check whether this
algorithm is the same as the zero algorithm
that just says print zero, no matter what. So
this is a very key problem that means that you
can't have a surefire way of checking whether
two algorithms generate the same decimal number.
So these next two difficulties are related.
The first is that it is difficult to find
a canonical algorithm for an infinite decimal.
When it comes to rational numbers like this one,
we can reduce the denominator and the numerator
by any common factors so that we get to a
situation where the numerator and denominator
do not have any common factors. And if we also
agree that the denominator is always positive,
then we get a canonical or standard form for a
rational number. That means whenever we have an
arithmetic problem involving a rational number,
we can ask for the answer in standard form,
which makes it very easy to check whether it's
the right answer or not. With real numbers, we
have no such situation. There are many different
algorithms for a given infinite decimal, and
there's no way of saying which one of these
algorithms is superior to the other ones. There's
no way of singling out a special algorithm that
we're going to be using exclusively for
that infinite decimal. So it becomes very
hard to tell when two infinite decimals are
equal, and so when I say "very hard," well,
it's pretty well impossible. So it's impossible
to tell when two infinite decimals are equal.
Here's an example: This integral here with this
expression involving 22/7 in this integral,
that's a real number in the sense of
this integral being interpreted in some
fashion or another as an algorithm. In fact,
there are a whole bunch of algorithms that
one can use to sort of unravel what this
integral is, but you take one of those,
and you generate a real number. Here's another
algorithm in terms of an infinite series. The
infinite series has some binomial coefficient
there, 2n choose n cubed, and then a fraction
42n plus 5 divided by 2 to the 12n plus 4—very
curious expression. Then we take the whole thing
and take its inverse. This is a formula of the
great Indian mathematician Ramanujan. This is
a formula that appeared in the University of
Sydney exam in 1960. It turns out that they
both evaluate to pi. They are both expressions
for pi. There are among hundreds of expressions
that are known, but let's say you were just
given these two algorithms and asked, "Well,
are the decimals the same?" It would be very, very
hard to check that. Some very deep mathematical
knowledge is necessary to recognize that both
of these happen to be expressions for pi.
So one of the consequences of this is that
arithmetic with real numbers becomes vague and
often almost tautological. Students don't practice
doing arithmetic with real numbers because it's
almost a non-existent subject except to the extent
that it contains rational numbers inside it. But,
for example, I've given you this problem in an
earlier video to calculate square root 2 plus pi
plus e in the real number framework. So the modern
mathematician really has no answer to that other
than to say, "Well, the answer is square root 2
plus pi plus e." That's the simplest expression
that we have for this sum. Similarly, suppose you
just sort of write down a random infinite series,
summation n equals zero to infinity e
to the minus (n + 5) times n cubed over
n squared plus 1 factorial. Now, it might be
that this thing, you know, evaluates to some
rational number like 3/4—highly unlikely, but
it's possible. But in the absence of knowing
some particular special fact like that, we don't
know how to sum such series in general. And if a
mathematician was asked to evaluate that, about
the only thing they could write down is this:
"I’m going to solve this problem
for you. Here's how you do it:
There, I've just solved it. I've
just evaluated that summation for
you. By the way, if anybody knows a
better answer, please let me know."
Now, I'm going to evaluate this function.
So here's a numerical expression:
I'm going to evaluate that here,
and this is the best I can do:
Again, if you can do better
than that, please let us know.
And now I'm going to evaluate this—this is an
integral. Alright, how do we evaluate that?
Of course, I could write down an infinite decimal
approximation, okay, but that's only a rational
approximation. I can't actually write down that
infinite decimal. If I want to say exactly what
this is, really the only thing I can do is I can
repeat the question back to you as an answer.
And finally, in the real number
framework, let's solve this problem:
1/2 plus 1/3 plus 1/5. Alright, if you're working
in the rational numbers, well then there's only
one possible answer, but if you're working
in the real numbers, algorithms are fluid,
and there's no special choice of algorithms.
So, in keeping with the things above here,
I think a student is justified in writing,
"Well, there it is. There's the answer."
Happy students doing arithmetic with real numbers!
So I'm being a bit facetious here, but this is
an issue. The issue is that we can't actually
effectively do arithmetic with real numbers at
all. And that's why first-year calculus books,
after they introduce real numbers,
rarely ever have a section on "Now
let's practice a little bit of real
number arithmetic to get you used to it,
to get you understanding how it
works." There's never a section
like that because the arithmetic is vacuous
in some sense. It's a necessary consequence
of this imprecision that we get when we look
at things with an algorithmic point of view.
Now, there are many other difficulties that
arise in mathematics as a consequence of this
point of view towards real numbers, but
I'm going to stop here. These are sort
of elementary considerations that are very
close to the core of the definition. So I
think the overall argument that I'm making here
is that trying to define real numbers in terms
of algorithms doesn't work. It has not been
done; there are too many technical obstacles,
and people are just playing some fantasy
game when they talk about this theory as
if the theory already exists. The theory is not
there, even though we would very much like it
to be there because that's what we use to do our
infinite series, to do our function evaluations,
to do our integrals, and to do many other
things. So we see a serious disconnect in modern
mathematics between rigorous thinking and the
actual practical application of what we're doing.
Now, most pure mathematicians are going to be
reluctant to face the music here. The idea is
to avoid thinking about this problem because
most mathematicians are aware at some level
that it's there. The agreement has been to "let's
not think about it too much," let's call all such
discussion, "Oh, that's philosophy," or, "That
has to do with the foundations of mathematics,
which doesn't need to concern us." But it
ought to concern us very much because it has
very serious consequences for mathematics.
And once you start adopting lazy attitudes
towards rigor at this level, it starts
infiltrating other areas in mathematics.
Students learn that there are certain places
where it's allowed to be woefully vague, where
it's allowed to be sort of hand-waving.
It's not an ideal situation, I think.
Next time, what we're going to do is look
at a very important object historically,
and one that many of you will probably like
very much: this magical object called pi. Is
it really a number? That is not so clear. I'm
going to introduce the idea that maybe pi is
something slightly different from a number in
the usual sense, so we'll have a historical
look at formulas for pi. I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.